README.md, before:

# natq

A language-agnostic distributed task queue framework built on NATS.

## Overview

natq enables decoupled task execution where producers only need to publish messages—no task implementation required. Workers register tasks and handle execution, while NATS provides the messaging infrastructure.

## Architecture

```
┌──────────────┐         ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Producer   │         │                    NATS                     │
│              │         │  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐    │
│  (any lang)  │────────▶│  │  KV: natq_tasks                     │    │
│              │         │  │  (task definitions for discovery)   │    │
└──────────────┘         │  └─────────────────────────────────────┘    │
      │                  │                                             │
      │                  │  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐    │
      │                  │  │  KV: natq_results                   │    │
      │                  │  │  (async task results)               │    │
      │                  │  │  Key: <task_id>.<run_id>            │    │
      ▼                  │  └─────────────────────────────────────┘    │
┌──────────────┐         │                                             │
│ Poll results │◀────────│  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐    │
│ from KV      │         │  │  Sync Tasks: Request/Reply          │    │
└──────────────┘         │  │  Subject: natq.req.<task_id>        │    │
                         │  └─────────────────────────────────────┘    │
                         │                                             │
                         │  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐    │
                         │  │  Async Tasks: JetStream             │    │
                         │  │  Stream: natq_jobs                  │    │
                         │  │  Subject: natq.job.<task_id>        │    │
                         │  └─────────────────────────────────────┘    │
                         └─────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                            │
                                            ▼
                         ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────┐
                         │                  Worker                     │
                         │  - Registers TaskDefinitions in KV          │
                         │  - Handles sync tasks via request/reply     │
                         │  - Consumes async jobs from JetStream       │
                         │  - Stores async results in KV               │
                         └─────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Task Types

| Type  | Pattern | Use Case |
|-------|---------|----------|
| `sync` | Request/Reply | Short-lived operations where the caller waits for the result |
| `async` | JetStream work queue | Long-running jobs with guaranteed delivery, results stored in KV |

## Specification

### TaskDefinition

Stored in NATS KV bucket `natq_tasks` with the task ID as key.

```typescript
interface TaskDefinition {
  id: string;                        // Unique task identifier
  type: "sync" | "async";            // Execution model
  subject: string;                   // NATS subject for triggering
  inputSchema?: string;              // Optional JSON Schema for input validation/discovery
  outputSchema?: string;             // Optional JSON Schema for output validation/discovery
}
```

### TaskRunOutput

Result of task execution. For async tasks, stored in KV bucket `natq_results` under key `<task_id>.<run_id>`.

```typescript
interface TaskRunOutput {
  id: string;                        // Run ID (from input runId or generated UUIDv7)
  taskId: string;                    // Reference to TaskDefinition.id
  status: number;                    // HTTP-style status code (100 = processing, 200 = success, 4xx/5xx = error)
  data?: any;                        // Result payload (conforms to outputSchema)
  error?: string;                    // Error message if status indicates failure
}
```

### Task Input Payload

The message payload sent to trigger a task.

```typescript
interface TaskRunInput {
  [key: string]: any;                // Input data (conforms to inputSchema)
  runId?: string;                    // Optional: custom run ID for tracking
}
```

## NATS Components

| Component | Name | Purpose |
|-----------|------|---------|
| **KV Bucket** | `natq_tasks` | Stores TaskDefinition records for task discovery |
| **KV Bucket** | `natq_results` | Stores async task results (key: `<task_id>.<run_id>`) |
| **Request/Reply** | `natq.req.<task_id>` | Handles synchronous task execution with immediate response |
| **JetStream Stream** | `natq_jobs` | Persists async job messages with delivery guarantees |
| **JetStream Consumer** | Work queue per task | Distributes jobs across worker instances |
| **Subject (sync)** | `natq.req.<task_id>` | Producers publish here to trigger sync tasks |
| **Subject (async)** | `natq.job.<task_id>` | Producers publish here to enqueue async jobs |

## Usage

### Worker

Each language SDK provides a `NatqWorker` class:

```
worker = NatqWorker(options)
worker.register_task("my-task", "sync", handler_function)
worker.start(nats_connection_options)
```

The worker does not connect to NATS before calling `worker.start()`.

#### Startup Sequence

1. Establishes NATS connection
2. Ensures NATS objects exist (KV buckets, JetStream stream)
3. Registers TaskDefinitions in the KV bucket
4. Starts sync listeners (request/reply subscriptions)
5. Starts async listeners (JetStream consumers)
6. Registers signal handlers (SIGINT, SIGTERM) for graceful shutdown

#### Shutdown

Call `worker.stop()` to gracefully shutdown:
1. Stops async consumers
2. Drains sync subscriptions
3. Waits for in-flight tasks to complete
4. Closes NATS connection

### Worker Configuration

| Option | Default | Description |
|--------|---------|-------------|
| `kvBucket` | `natq_tasks` | KV bucket name for task definitions |
| `resultsBucket` | `natq_results` | KV bucket name for async task results |
| `streamName` | `natq_jobs` | JetStream stream name for async jobs |
| `logLevel` | `info` | Log level (`debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error`) |
| `syncSubjectPrefix` | `natq.req.` | Subject prefix for sync tasks |
| `asyncSubjectPrefix` | `natq.job.` | Subject prefix for async tasks |
| `heartbeatIntervalMs` | `10000` | Heartbeat interval for async task processing (ms) |

### Task Handler

Task handlers receive input and context, and return a result:

```typescript
async function handler(input: TaskRunInput, context: TaskContext): Promise<TaskRunOutput> {
  // context.runId - unique run identifier
  // context.task - task definition
  // context.workerId - worker instance ID

  return {
    id: context.runId,
    taskId: context.task.id,
    status: 200,
    data: { result: "success" }
  };
}
```

### Async Task Lifecycle

1. **Producer publishes job** to `natq.job.<task_id>` with optional `runId`
2. **Worker creates initial result** in KV with status `100` (Processing)
3. **Worker executes handler** and updates KV with final result
4. **Producer polls KV** for result using key `<task_id>.<run_id>`

### Async Task Error Handling

Async tasks use message acknowledgment based on status codes:

| Status | Action | Behavior |
|--------|--------|----------|
| < 300 | ACK | Success, message removed from queue, result stored in KV |
| 300-499 | TERM | Client error, message terminated (no retry), result stored in KV |
| >= 500 | NAK | Server error, message requeued with exponential backoff (max 60s) |

### Producer

Producers trigger tasks by publishing to the appropriate subject:

```
# Sync task - wait for reply
result = nats.request("natq.req.my-task", payload)

# Async task - fire and forget
nats.jetstream.publish("natq.job.my-task", payload)

# Async task - with custom run ID for tracking
nats.jetstream.publish("natq.job.my-task", { ...payload, runId: "my-run-123" })

# Poll for async result
result = nats.kv("natq_results").get("my-task.my-run-123")
```

## Status Codes

TaskRunOutput uses HTTP-style status codes:

| Code | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| 100 | Processing (async task in progress) |
| 200 | Success |
| 400 | Bad request (invalid input) |
| 406 | Not acceptable (invalid JSON input) |
| 500 | Internal error |

## SDK Implementations

| Language | Package | Documentation |
|----------|---------|---------------|
| TypeScript | `natq-ts` | [natq-ts/README.md](natq-ts/README.md) |

## E2E Tests

End-to-end tests verify that SDK implementations correctly implement the natq protocol. The test suite uses a Go-based tester that acts as a producer, allowing any language worker to be tested.

**Test coverage:**
- Sync task execution (request/reply)
- Async task lifecycle (KV status progression)
- Error handling (4xx client errors, 5xx server errors)
- Retry behavior with exponential backoff

**Quick start:**
```bash
# Terminal 1: Start NATS with JetStream
nats-server -js

# Terminal 2: Start a worker (e.g., TypeScript)
cd e2e/workers/typescript && yarn install && yarn start

# Terminal 3: Run tests
cd e2e/tester && go run .
```

See [e2e/README.md](e2e/README.md) for full documentation.

Commit message:

Implemented fire-and-forget mechanism

README.md, after:

# natq

A language-agnostic distributed task queue framework built on NATS.

## Overview

natq enables decoupled task execution where producers only need to publish messages—no task implementation required. Workers register tasks and handle execution, while NATS provides the messaging infrastructure.

## Architecture

```
┌──────────────┐         ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Producer   │         │                    NATS                     │
│              │         │  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐    │
│  (any lang)  │────────▶│  │  KV: natq_tasks                     │    │
│              │         │  │  (task definitions for discovery)   │    │
└──────────────┘         │  └─────────────────────────────────────┘    │
      │                  │                                             │
      │                  │  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐    │
      │                  │  │  KV: natq_results                   │    │
      │                  │  │  (async task results)               │    │
      │                  │  │  Key: <task_id>.<run_id>            │    │
      ▼                  │  └─────────────────────────────────────┘    │
┌──────────────┐         │                                             │
│ Poll results │◀────────│  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐    │
│ from KV      │         │  │  Sync Tasks: Request/Reply          │    │
└──────────────┘         │  │  Subject: natq.req.<task_id>        │    │
                         │  └─────────────────────────────────────┘    │
                         │                                             │
                         │  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐    │
                         │  │  Async Tasks: JetStream             │    │
                         │  │  Stream: natq_jobs                  │    │
                         │  │  Subject: natq.job.<task_id>        │    │
                         │  └─────────────────────────────────────┘    │
                         └─────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                            │
                                            ▼
                         ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────┐
                         │                  Worker                     │
                         │  - Registers TaskDefinitions in KV          │
                         │  - Handles sync tasks via request/reply     │
                         │  - Consumes async jobs from JetStream       │
                         │  - Stores async results in KV               │
                         └─────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Task Types

| Type  | Pattern | Use Case |
|-------|---------|----------|
| `sync` | Request/Reply | Short-lived operations where the caller waits for the result |
| `async` | JetStream work queue | Long-running jobs with guaranteed delivery, results stored in KV |

## Specification

### TaskDefinition

Stored in NATS KV bucket `natq_tasks` with the task ID as key.

```typescript
interface TaskDefinition {
  id: string;                        // Unique task identifier
  type: "sync" | "async";            // Execution model
  subject: string;                   // NATS subject for triggering
  inputSchema?: string;              // Optional JSON Schema for input validation/discovery
  outputSchema?: string;             // Optional JSON Schema for output validation/discovery
}
```

### TaskRunOutput

Result of task execution. For async tasks, stored in KV bucket `natq_results` under key `<task_id>.<run_id>`.

```typescript
interface TaskRunOutput {
  id: string;                        // Run ID (from input runId or generated UUIDv7)
  taskId: string;                    // Reference to TaskDefinition.id
  status: number;                    // HTTP-style status code (100 = processing, 200 = success, 4xx/5xx = error)
  data?: any;                        // Result payload (conforms to outputSchema)
  error?: string;                    // Error message if status indicates failure
}
```

### Task Input Payload

The message payload sent to trigger a task.

```typescript
interface TaskRunInput {
  [key: string]: any;                // Input data (conforms to inputSchema)
  runId?: string;                    // Optional: custom run ID for tracking
  dropResultOnSuccess?: boolean;     // Optional: delete result from KV after success (async only)
}
```

### Fire-and-Forget Async Tasks

For async tasks where results don't need to be persisted, set `dropResultOnSuccess: true` in the input payload. The worker will:
1. Write the result to KV (allowing watchers to see the final status)
2. Acknowledge the message
3. Delete the result from KV immediately after

This keeps the results bucket clean for high-volume fire-and-forget workloads. Clients watching for the result will still see the OK status before it's deleted.

## NATS Components

| Component | Name | Purpose |
|-----------|------|---------|
| **KV Bucket** | `natq_tasks` | Stores TaskDefinition records for task discovery |
| **KV Bucket** | `natq_results` | Stores async task results (key: `<task_id>.<run_id>`) |
| **Request/Reply** | `natq.req.<task_id>` | Handles synchronous task execution with immediate response |
| **JetStream Stream** | `natq_jobs` | Persists async job messages with delivery guarantees |
| **JetStream Consumer** | Work queue per task | Distributes jobs across worker instances |
| **Subject (sync)** | `natq.req.<task_id>` | Producers publish here to trigger sync tasks |
| **Subject (async)** | `natq.job.<task_id>` | Producers publish here to enqueue async jobs |

## Usage

### Worker

Each language SDK provides a `NatqWorker` class:

```
worker = NatqWorker(options)
worker.register_task("my-task", "sync", handler_function)
worker.start(nats_connection_options)
```

The worker does not connect to NATS before calling `worker.start()`.

#### Startup Sequence

1. Establishes NATS connection
2. Ensures NATS objects exist (KV buckets, JetStream stream)
3. Registers TaskDefinitions in the KV bucket
4. Starts sync listeners (request/reply subscriptions)
5. Starts async listeners (JetStream consumers)
6. Registers signal handlers (SIGINT, SIGTERM) for graceful shutdown

#### Shutdown

Call `worker.stop()` to gracefully shutdown:
1. Stops async consumers
2. Drains sync subscriptions
3. Waits for in-flight tasks to complete
4. Closes NATS connection

### Worker Configuration

| Option | Default | Description |
|--------|---------|-------------|
| `kvBucket` | `natq_tasks` | KV bucket name for task definitions |
| `resultsBucket` | `natq_results` | KV bucket name for async task results |
| `streamName` | `natq_jobs` | JetStream stream name for async jobs |
| `logLevel` | `info` | Log level (`debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error`) |
| `syncSubjectPrefix` | `natq.req.` | Subject prefix for sync tasks |
| `asyncSubjectPrefix` | `natq.job.` | Subject prefix for async tasks |
| `heartbeatIntervalMs` | `10000` | Heartbeat interval for async task processing (ms) |

### Task Handler

Task handlers receive input and context, and return a result:

```typescript
async function handler(input: TaskRunInput, context: TaskContext): Promise<TaskRunOutput> {
  // context.runId - unique run identifier
  // context.task - task definition
  // context.workerId - worker instance ID

  return {
    id: context.runId,
    taskId: context.task.id,
    status: 200,
    data: { result: "success" }
  };
}
```

### Async Task Lifecycle

1. **Producer publishes job** to `natq.job.<task_id>` with optional `runId`
2. **Worker creates initial result** in KV with status `100` (Processing)
3. **Worker executes handler** and updates KV with final result
4. **Producer polls KV** for result using key `<task_id>.<run_id>`

### Async Task Error Handling

Async tasks use message acknowledgment based on status codes:

| Status | Action | Behavior |
|--------|--------|----------|
| < 300 | ACK | Success, message removed from queue, result stored in KV |
| 300-499 | TERM | Client error, message terminated (no retry), result stored in KV |
| >= 500 | NAK | Server error, message requeued with exponential backoff (max 60s) |

### Producer

Producers trigger tasks by publishing to the appropriate subject:

```
# Sync task - wait for reply
result = nats.request("natq.req.my-task", payload)

# Async task - fire and forget
nats.jetstream.publish("natq.job.my-task", payload)

# Async task - with custom run ID for tracking
nats.jetstream.publish("natq.job.my-task", { ...payload, runId: "my-run-123" })

# Poll for async result
result = nats.kv("natq_results").get("my-task.my-run-123")
```

## Status Codes

TaskRunOutput uses HTTP-style status codes:

| Code | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| 100 | Processing (async task in progress) |
| 200 | Success |
| 400 | Bad request (invalid input) |
| 406 | Not acceptable (invalid JSON input) |
| 500 | Internal error |

## SDK Implementations

| Language | Package | Documentation |
|----------|---------|---------------|
| TypeScript | `natq-ts` | [natq-ts/README.md](natq-ts/README.md) |

## E2E Tests

End-to-end tests verify that SDK implementations correctly implement the natq protocol. The test suite uses a Go-based tester that acts as a producer, allowing any language worker to be tested.

**Test coverage:**
- Sync task execution (request/reply)
- Async task lifecycle (KV status progression)
- Error handling (4xx client errors, 5xx server errors)
- Retry behavior with exponential backoff

**Quick start:**
```bash
# Terminal 1: Start NATS with JetStream
nats-server -js

# Terminal 2: Start a worker (e.g., TypeScript)
cd e2e/workers/typescript && yarn install && yarn start

# Terminal 3: Run tests
cd e2e/tester && go run .
```

See [e2e/README.md](e2e/README.md) for full documentation.
